README.md, before:

# fn, a programming language

**fn** will be a general purpose programming language with LISP-style syntax. The goal is to create
a minimalist core language with coherent syntax and predictable, extensible semantics. Features
include:

- an intuitive and tightly-integrated object system
- functions, types, protocols, and modules are first class objects, allowing a great deal of
  flexibility at runtime
- powerful metaprogramming facilities inspired by Common Lisp
- many parentheses


# Language Basics

## Syntax

fn is a member of the Lisp family, and as such has very simple syntax.

There are two basic forms of expressions in fn: **atoms** and **commands**. An **atom** is a single
value, such as a variable name, a number, a string, or a boolean. A **command** is a sequence of
expressions within a pair of parentheses. The first element in the sequence is called the
**operator** and the others are the **arguments**.

```
;; comments begin with one or more semicolons and end with newlines
;; The only other role of whitespace is to separate expressions

;; examples of atoms
23
-6
27.0
"Hello, World!"
true
false
null

;; every command has this form:
(operator argument1 argument2 and-so-on)

;; example commands using built-in arithmetic operators
(+ 3 4)   ; = 7
(/ 8 2)   ; = 4
;; arithmetic operators accept arbitrarily many arguments
(+ 1 2 3) ; = 6
;; commands can be nested
(* (- 2 4) 17) ; = -34

;; commands may also have side effects
(print "Hello, world!") ; prints to STDOUT
```

All other syntax is really just sugar; in fact, the interpreter converts all expressions to command
and atom syntax before evaluation. For example, fn provides dot syntax which expands as follows:

```
object.field
;; is expanded to
(get object (quote field))
```


## Control flow

fn's control flow primitives are the special operators `do`, `if`, `cond`, and `case`.

```
;; do evaluates a series of expressions in order
(do
  (print "What's up, world?")
  ;; the String command creates a string from its arguments
  (print (String "Two plus two is " (+ 2 2)))
  (print "Goodbye, globe!"))

;; if takes three arguments: a condition, a then clause, and an else clause:
(if (= 2 4)                    ; condition
    (print "math is broken")   ; then clause (not evaluated because condition is false)
    (print "everything's ok")) ; else clause
    
;; for the purposes of if, every value except false and null is considered true
(if true 1 2)  ; = 1
(if false 1 2) ; = 2
(if null 1 2)  ; = 2
(if 17 1 2)    ; = 1

;; cond is similar to if, but it takes arbitrarily many condition-and-result 
;; pairs for arguments. cond returns the result of the first condition that 
;; succeeds. (Lisp programmers should note that this version of cond has fewer
;; parentheses than usual).
(defvar x 17)
(cond
  (even? x) "x is even" ; even? checks if a number is even
  true      "x is odd")
;; = "x is odd"
(set x 18)
(cond
  (= x 18)  "x is eighteen" ; (= x y) checks if x and y are equal
  (even? x) "x is even"
  true      "x is odd")
;; = "x is eighteen" because only the first result is used
```

`case` performs pattern matching and is tightly coupled to fn's object system, so we decline to
discuss it here.

## Variables and functions

Various special forms exist to create global variables.

```
;; def is a special operator used to create variables. This is an abuse of 
;; terminology, as these "variables" are actually constants by default
(def x 17)
x ; = 17
;; set is used to assign values. In this case, it emits an error because x is 
;; constant
(set x 18)

;; defvar creates "true" variables
(defvar y null)
;; so this is legal
(set y "foo")
```

## Higher order functions

This section is a work in progress.

```
;; map, filter, and reduce
(def test-input [23 14 2 -2 6 15 -8 3 20 -12 0 -19])

(map $(+ $ 6) test-input)
;; => [29 20 8 4 12 21 -2 9 26 -6 6 -13]

(filter even? test-input)
;; => [14 2 -2 6 -8 20 -12 0]

(reduce $(+ (* $0 10) $1) [4 0 3 2])
;; => 4032
```


## Stolen goods

Most of the ideas in this programming language are not original. Notably, I owe a lot of language
and library features to Clojure, Scheme, Common Lisp, Haskell, Python, and Javascript. My main
contribution is bringing these stolen goods together under a coherent interface.


## A Note to the Reader: Proceed with Caution

This is a personal project to make a programming language. All the source
contained herein comes with no guarantee of quality (although I try my best!),
no support (but leave a comment if you have one!), and a very, very unstable
interface.

No effort has been made to make this code readable to other people, in case the
fact that I'm using Common Lisp wasn't a giveaway. No effort has been or will be
made to implement features or libraries that I, the despot, do not personally
desire. No effort has been made to make this code portable. It works on with
SBCL on my computers and possibly nowhere else because I'm not about to test it.
I do not plan on accepting any commits from anyone else. That said, feel free to
use the code as you want, as long as you abide the GPLv3 license.

Commit message:

Updated README with development plans

README.md, after:

# fn, a programming language

**fn** will be a general purpose programming language with LISP-style syntax. The goal is to create
a minimalist core language with coherent syntax and predictable, extensible semantics. Features
include:

- an intuitive and tightly-integrated object system
- functions, types, protocols, and modules are first class objects, allowing a great deal of
  flexibility at runtime
- powerful metaprogramming facilities inspired by Common Lisp
- many parentheses

## Development status and plans

Version 0 of fn is currently in development. At the time of writing, fn should be considered
incomplete software and should probably not be used for any purpose.

At the moment, the core language specification is very unstable and not fully documented. Version 0
will be released once the core language is stable and fully realized via an unoptimized tree-walking
interpreter. The version 0 release series will focus on improving the performance and error
reporting of the tree-walking while expanding the standard library.

A version 1.0 release is far away down the line, and will involve writing a high-performance VM in C++.


# Language Basics

## Syntax

fn is a member of the Lisp family, and as such has very simple syntax.

There are two basic forms of expressions in fn: **atoms** and **commands**. An **atom** is a single
value, such as a variable name, a number, a string, or a boolean. A **command** is a sequence of
expressions within a pair of parentheses. The first element in the sequence is called the
**operator** and the others are the **arguments**.

```
;; comments begin with one or more semicolons and end with newlines
;; The only other role of whitespace is to separate expressions

;; examples of atoms
23
-6
27.0
"Hello, World!"
true
false
null

;; every command has this form:
(operator argument1 argument2 and-so-on)

;; example commands using built-in arithmetic operators
(+ 3 4)   ; = 7
(/ 8 2)   ; = 4
;; arithmetic operators accept arbitrarily many arguments
(+ 1 2 3) ; = 6
;; commands can be nested
(* (- 2 4) 17) ; = -34

;; commands may also have side effects
(print "Hello, world!") ; prints to STDOUT
```

All other syntax is really just sugar; in fact, the interpreter converts all expressions to command
and atom syntax before evaluation. For example, fn provides dot syntax which expands as follows:

```
object.field
;; is expanded to
(get object (quote field))
```


## Control flow

fn's control flow primitives are the special operators `do`, `if`, `cond`, and `case`.

```
;; do evaluates a series of expressions in order
(do
  (print "What's up, world?")
  ;; the String command creates a string from its arguments
  (print (String "Two plus two is " (+ 2 2)))
  (print "Goodbye, globe!"))

;; if takes three arguments: a condition, a then clause, and an else clause:
(if (= 2 4)                    ; condition
    (print "math is broken")   ; then clause (not evaluated because condition is false)
    (print "everything's ok")) ; else clause
    
;; for the purposes of if, every value except false and null is considered true
(if true 1 2)  ; = 1
(if false 1 2) ; = 2
(if null 1 2)  ; = 2
(if 17 1 2)    ; = 1

;; cond is similar to if, but it takes arbitrarily many condition-and-result 
;; pairs for arguments. cond returns the result of the first condition that 
;; succeeds. (Lisp programmers should note that this version of cond has fewer
;; parentheses than usual).
(defvar x 17)
(cond
  (even? x) "x is even" ; even? checks if a number is even
  true      "x is odd")
;; = "x is odd"
(set x 18)
(cond
  (= x 18)  "x is eighteen" ; (= x y) checks if x and y are equal
  (even? x) "x is even"
  true      "x is odd")
;; = "x is eighteen" because only the first result is used
```

`case` performs pattern matching and is tightly coupled to fn's object system, so we decline to
discuss it here.

## Variables and functions

Various special forms exist to create global variables.

```
;; def is a special operator used to create variables. This is an abuse of 
;; terminology, as these "variables" are actually constants by default
(def x 17)
x ; = 17
;; set is used to assign values. In this case, it emits an error because x is 
;; constant
(set x 18)

;; defvar creates "true" variables
(defvar y null)
;; so this is legal
(set y "foo")
```

## Higher order functions

This section is a work in progress.

```
;; map, filter, and reduce
(def test-input [23 14 2 -2 6 15 -8 3 20 -12 0 -19])

(map $(+ $ 6) test-input)
;; => [29 20 8 4 12 21 -2 9 26 -6 6 -13]

(filter even? test-input)
;; => [14 2 -2 6 -8 20 -12 0]

(reduce $(+ (* $0 10) $1) [4 0 3 2])
;; => 4032
```


## Stolen goods

Most of the ideas in this programming language are not original. Notably, I owe a lot of language
and library features to Clojure, Scheme, Common Lisp, Haskell, Python, and Javascript. My main
contribution is bringing these stolen goods together under a coherent interface.


## A Note to the Reader: Proceed with Caution

This is a personal project to make a programming language. All the source
contained herein comes with no guarantee of quality (although I try my best!),
no support (but leave a comment if you have one!), and a very, very unstable
interface.

No effort has been made to make this code readable to other people, in case the
fact that I'm using Common Lisp wasn't a giveaway. No effort has been or will be
made to implement features or libraries that I, the despot, do not personally
desire. No effort has been made to make this code portable. It works on with
SBCL on my computers and possibly nowhere else because I'm not about to test it.
I do not plan on accepting any commits from anyone else. That said, feel free to
use the code as you want, as long as you abide the GPLv3 license.
